title: "1985 Soil Survey"
tags:
---

Checked out *Soil Survey of Hillsborough County New Hampshire: Western Part*
(1985) from [Peterborough Town Library](peterboroughtownlibrary.org). Survey
conducted in 1982 by United States Dept. of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service in cooperation with NH Agriculture Experiment Station. Relevant excerpts
below:

Our house sits at the crest of a hill. Our front yard begins a gradual, then
increasing slope, eventually dropping about 140 feet to a valley about 800 feet
to the south (about a 17.5% slope), and is represented by section 76D (Marlow
loam, 15 to 25 percent slopes), below. The back yard is slightly sloped, but is
largely flat going to the back of the neighborhood, and is represented by
section 77B (Marlow stony loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes), below.

> ## General Nature of the Survey Area

> &hellip;

> ### Geology

> The soils of Hillsborough County, Western Part, are underlain by metamorphic and igneous rocks. These rocks are 365 to 400 million years old and belong to the Devonian Period. The metamorphic rocks are the Littleton Formation, which consists of gray, coarse-grained mica schist.

> In the northwestern corner of the survey area, the igneous rocks called Kinsman Quartz Monzonite intruded through the Littleton Formation (3). Kinsman Quartz Monzonite underlies parts of the towns of Windsor, Millsborough, Antrim, Hancock, Peterborough, and Weare. Kinsman Quartz Monzonite is resistant to weathering: thus, large boulders are scattered on the surface of many thousands of acres in these towns. The boulders range in size from 2 feet in diameter to the size of an automobile. Scattered throughout Kinsman Quartz Monzonite are crystals of white feldspar, some of which are as much as 3 inches long.

> The soils of the survey area formed in glacial deposits that overlie bedrock. About 14,000 years ago, a great ice sheet, or glacier, covered all of the New England States. The ice sheet started forming in Canada and advanced southward as the climate grew colder. At its peak, the ice sheet in Hillsborough County was as much as 1 mile thick. It scraped the surface of the ground and picked up stones and boulders, crushing and mixing them. In many places, it rounded off the tops of hills and mountains, forming drumlins.

> When the climate started to warm again, the glacier began to melt and dropped the debris it was carrying over the landscape. This debris, or glacial till, now forms a mantle averaging 20 feet in thickness on uplands in the survey area. Glacial till covers most of Hillsborough County, Western Part, and many soils developed in it. In some places the bedrock is exposed, particularly on mountaintops.

> In river valleys the water from the melting glacier flowed rapidly, carrying huge quantities of sand and gravel. The sand and gravel were deposited along the sides of the glacial river valleys on terrace, or on the bottoms of these valleys on outwash plains. The sandy and gravelly soils formed in this material.

> There has been little change in most of the landscape since the glacier melted, about 12,000 years ago. Since that time, minor amounts of deposition have occurred on flood plains, and deposition and accumulation of organic material have occurred in some wet areas.

> Information about the geology and the glacial history of the survey area can be found in several studies (6,7). Table 18 shows the relationship among parent material, landscape position, dominant texture, and drainage of the soils in the survey area.

> &hellip;

> ## Detailed soil map units

> &hellip;

> **76D--Marlow loam, 15 to 25 percent slopes.** This soil is moderately steep
and well drained. It is on side slopes on hilly uplands. Many of the hills are
smooth-sided, oval-shaped hills called drumlins (fig. 7). Areas of the soil are
long and narrow in shape and range from 10 to 50 acres.

> Typically, the surface layer is dark brown loam about 8 inches thick. The
subsoil, to a depth of 24 inches, is yellowish brown fine sandy loam in the
upper part, light olive brown fine sandy loam in the middle part, and olive
sandy loam in the lower part. The substratum, to a depth of 60 inches or more,
is light olive brown, very firm fine sandy loam.

> Included with this soil in mapping are scattered small areas of Marlow soils
that have slopes of 25 to 35 percent and areas of Becket and Tunbridge soils.
Also included are some areas where a few stones are on the surface. The included
soils make up about 15 percent of the map unit.

> Permeability of this Marlow soil is moderate in the surface layer and subsoil
and slow or moderately slow in the substratum. The available water capacity is
moderate. The very firm substratum limits the depth of the root zone. In most
years the seasonal high water table is perched on the substratum from November
through March. Depth to bedrock generally is more than 60 inches. Potential
frost action is moderate.

> Most of the acreage of this soil is used for pasture or hay. Some areas are
used as woodland.

> This soil is poorly suited to row crops because of slope and the erosion
hazard. Slope and the erosion hazard are also limitations for hay and pasture.
Stripcropping and using grasses and legumes in the cropping system help to
control erosion.

> This soil is well suited to most species of trees. Potential productivity is
moderately high. There are few limitations to most forest management practices.
Slope is a limitation to equipment operation. The erosion hazard on logging
roads and skid trails is increased if logging equipment is used during wet
periods. Laying out these roads and trails on the contour helps to control
erosion and permits easier and safer operation of the equipment.

> Slope is a limitation to use of this soil for building site development and as
sites for septic tank absorption fields, sewage lagoons, and most types of
recreation development.

> **77B--Marlow stony loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes.** This soil is gently sloping
and well drained. It is on hillcrests and at the base of slopes on hilly
uplands. Many of the hills are smooth-sided, oval-shaped hills called drumlins.
Areas of the soil are long and narrow in shape, and range from 5 to 50 acres.
Stones 1 to 1 1/2 feet in diameter and 5 to 30 feet apart are on the surface.

> Typically, the surface layer is covered by about 1 inch of fresh leaf litter.
The surface layer consists of 1 inch of decomposed leaf litter over 5 inches of
dark brown loam. The subsoil, to a depth of 24 inches, is yellowish brown fine
sandy loam in the upper part, light olive brown fine sandy loam in the middle
part, and olive sandy loam in the lower part. The substratum, to a depth of 60
inches or more, is light olive brown, very firm fine sandy loam.

> Included with this soil in mapping are small areas of Peru and Pillsbury soils
in slight depressions and scattered small areas of Tunbridge soils. Also
included are areas of Marlow soils that have slopes of 0 to 3 percent or 8 to 15
percent. Also included are some areas where stones that are less than 5 feet
apart are on the surface. The included soils make up about 20 percent of the map
unit.

> Permeability of this Marlow soil is moderate in the surface layer and subsoil
and slow or moderately slow in the substratum. The available water capacity is
moderate. The very firm substratum limits the depth of the root zone. In most
years the seasonal high water table is perched on the substratum from November
through March. Depth to bedrock is more than 60 inches. Potential frost action
is moderate.

> Most of the acreage of this soil is used as woodland. A few areas are used as
unimproved pasture. Some areas are used for residential development.

> This soil is not suited to row crops because of stones on the surface. Stones
on the surface are also a limitation for hay and pasture. The stones interfere
with cultivation and harvesting machinery. If the surface is cleared of stones,
the soil is suited to row crops, hay, and pasture.

> This soil is well suited to most species of trees. Potential productivity is
moderately high. There are few limitations to most forest management practices
and to logging operations. However, the erosion hazard on logging roads and skid
trails is increased if logging equipment is used during wet periods. Laying out
these roads and trails on the contour helps to control erosion.

> The seasonal high water table is a limitation to use of this soil for most
types of building site development. This limitation can generally be overcome by
installing a drainage system. For local roads and streets, potential frost
action can be overcome by installing a drainage system and by providing a
coarser grained base material. Stones, unless removed, are a limitation for
lawns and landscaping.

> The seasonal high water table and permeability are limitations to use of this
soil as sites for septic tank absorption fields. These limitations can be
overcome respectively by installing a drainage system to intercept runoff from
higher areas and by enlarging the absorption field. Seepage and slope are
limitations for sewage lagoons. Slope can be overcome by cutting and shaping the
slope. Surface stones, unless removed, are a limitation to use of this soil as
sites for camp and picnic areas and playgrounds. There are few limitations for
paths and trails.

> This soil is in capability subclass VIs.

> &hellip;

> ## Classification of the Soils

> &hellip;

> ### Soil Series and their Morphology

> &hellip;

> #### Marlow Series

> The Marlow series consists of well drained soils that formed in loamy glacial till over compact glacial till derived mainly from mica schist and granite. These soils are on drumlins and on side slopes of hills and ridges. Slopes range from 3 to 35 percent.

> Marlow soils are near somewhat excessively drained Lyman soils, well drained Monadnock and Tunbridge soils, moderately well drained Peru soils, and poorly drained and somewhat poorly drained Pillsbury soils. Unlike Lyman, Monadnock, and Tunbridge soils, Marlow soils ahve a firm or very firm substratum. Marlow soils and Peru and Pillsbury soils formed in similar parent material.

> &hellip;
